Welcome!

Thank you for your interest in the TASKING 80C51XA development
tools. This demonstration project guides you through some of the 
features of EDE and shows you how you can use the project 
environment.

EDE is an integrated environment that supports the entire 
edit-build-debug loop. You can create projects, define the 
files that make up the project and edit them in the EDE editor. 
With the button bar in the top of the screen you can compile a 
single file, build a project and start the CrossView debugger.
Also there is a button to browse through a list of error messages
that may have been reported during the build process.

When you use the 'ERR' button the editor prompts you automatically
to the right position in the file where the error has been detected.
Left to the 'ERR' button are the build button and the button to
compile a single file. Right to the 'ERR' button is the 'fly-swatter'
that starts the CrossView debugger. 

Note that messages generated by the tools are intercepted by EDE
and displayed in the 'Build tab' of the output screen in the bottom 
of the window.
EDE has been preconfigured to show the output screen. If you run 
EDE from a different configuration file you enable the output window
from the Output selection in the Window menu.

In EDE you do not need to create project build scripts yourself. 
EDE generates them automatically for you based on the files you have 
defined in your project and the tools options you have choosen from 
the EDE menu.

The EDE menu has a selection to set options for the compiler, assembler, 
linker/locator and the debugger.
The compiler and assembler options selection responds to the active 
window. If the active window in EDE is e.g. a C source file, the 
compiler selection in the EDE menu allows you to set options for that 
specific file or for all the C files in the project. The order in which
you do so is not important. Individual file options always prevail over
project wide options.
Every time you close the option selection from the EDE menu a new build
file (makefile) will be generated. 

The toolset includes on-line manuals which are available as buttons
in the button bar or via the manual selection in the EDE menu.

The Build Options selection in the EDE menu allows you to override the
generated makefile. You can specify an alternate build file. Note that
this automatically excludes the option selection in the tool tabs.

As you can see the tool tabs explain the option behaviour rather than
specifying the option strings themselves. If you are used to the 
commandline options you may want to verify that the selections you make
in the tabs correspond to the command line options you have in mind.
You can do this by checking the box 'Show command line option at the 
bottom of a tool tab' in the EDE/Build menu selection. This will enable 
a box in the tool tabs that show the commandline equivalents of the 
options you select.

Once you have compiled a project successfully you can start the 
debugger. Please refer to the CrossView documentation for more details
on operating the debugger.

			  -.-.-.-
